Room E144
@elaine_marino
#growdevelopers



I wish I had like background music... so quiet!

It's time.

Thakns for coming. My name is elaine marino. You can find me on twitter,
#growdevelopers. Happy to talk before/during/after, I just appreciate you
bring here.


GOals
    bring a new perspecitve to diversity dlimema
    provide solutions for software/tech


Where I come from:
    I worked in Advertising in NYC in 2010. Not much has changed in 50 years.
    There is a big difference between ad/tech, the percentage of women is
    about 56%, tech is about 26%. Ad is trending, but only 3% of women make it
    ot exec level


    How'd I get from there to tech? I have another talk later this week. I
    left for a numberf of reasons, but I left for BOulder to do startup
    marketing. As I was doing it, it became clear I didn't understand the tech
    or what I was marketing. I was nervous I wasn't going to ge ta seat at the
    table. Then I read this quote:
        "one reason there is so few women in 
            Kate Auletta, July

    Took an 11 week intensive course, a 6 month internship, and Joined every
    netowrking group and converence. Then I put my own converence, lady coders
    boulder, then into a biz called lady coder productions with my parnter
    goulding.

    That is the gist of how I got here. THis is my perspective as both insider
    and outsider. This is abou tmy journey as a rails dev, and what I've
    leanred about coming into this industry. In many instances, I'll make
    assumptions based on my story.


    Current potrait of tech:

    Every month, we add about 9600 jobs per month. Ave salary of 78K.
    Women make up 22 of tech, but 53 overall

    latino and AA workers make up less than 5%.

    22 includes Q/A, and analysts too.

Who cares what the number is, it's about balance. Something is out of balance.
It' snot just a moral problem, with moral implications. it is an economic,
productivity, business problem.

Quick detour.

    easier to talk about sex life than gender
    Gender/race/class/relgion are difficult to discuss. We have to give
    ourselves a break, and be ready to talk about this stuff
    we're taught from birth what it means to be a man/woman, and anything
    challenging binary roles is uncomfortable. If you don't know someones
    gender when you talk to them, you are looking for cues constantly. Even
    though we want to believe we don't hav ebias, it's there. Same for
    race/class.

    Our biases exist.


What does diversity mean?
    Gender
    Race
    age (kind of fuzzier)
    class
    religion
    disabled

    lots of diff attributes.

Why important?
    There are real biz implications.
    HBR did a survey of top 24 CEO's with diversity agendas. They blieved it
    was part of stay8ng competitive, not just moral.

    Credit suisse interviewed over 2000 global companies in 2011, and how they
    performed after financial crisis. The companies with at least one female
    director outperformed all others for last six years.

I'm going to talk about starbucks. At the time I gave this talk the first
time, Howard Shultz was not well known. He grew up poor in the projects of
brooklyn, got a sports scholarship, and was first in his family to go to
college. He was determined to offer health insurance b/c of what he saw
growing up. 

The qutesion here, what if he didn't grow up poor? What if he didn't
experience classism? Starbucks would not be the company that it is today. It
wouldn't be such a great place to work, or as profitable. he's had to fight
with shareholdrs the whole time for healthcare and equity options fo
remployees.


There were some women who were at the conference, who were over 40, and that a
shift happens when you reach a certain age. You are sitting on th4e sidelines,
not able to fit into the new culture. if someone is 55, SSI doesn't kick in
until 66. That is 11 good years, and tey have lots of experience built on
failure/frustration, and can help train the next gen. They'll be loyal, and
not care what beer you have in the fridge.

Merisant CEO paul block. "Diversity creates dissent. Without it, you don't get
deep inquiry or breakthroughs."

It solves problems, and it is overall better for economy.

Big MEssage:
    Calvary is not coming. There is not a flock of devs that is going to
    influx and grow the economy. Unless immigration changes, calvary is not
    coming. Universities need to produce 1M more STEM grads than the previous
    decade, to maintain the lead globally.

Top-Down
    If you ar ea a senior dev, company owner, this is how you affect change in
    industry. In my research i've been fascinated by leadership who set up
    metrics and take action. i've met these people at diff companies. I've met
    the VP of engineering, and he made it his personal mission to get more
    women and diversity on his team. in 1 year, he hired 5 new women, and it
    grew exponentionally.

    inclusivity must be a personal mission.

Quotas are controversial, but it makes a lot of sense. going from 0 to 5% is
almost impossible. This is where software development is. I implore leaders to
think about how to enforce diversity within your company.

"I am a mother of two. I don't care about your beer or pingpong." Female SR SE

What is important to this woman? Healthcare, travel, sicktime for her kids.
Beer is not going to be wha tyou lure her with.

It is about mutual respect. Software development needs to overcome some
serious issues of respect. I was never challenged in my marketing career, I
was always expected that I could do my job. If you are in tech, think about
mutual respect. I would sit in on code reviews. "why would you put taht there,
you idiot! Why would you use that gem douchebag!" People challenge code all
the time, but no one challenges the ignorance. When you're on twitter, it is
time to speak up and challenge ignorance.


Top-Down Recap
    Consider quotes to get from 1-5%
    looking at company culture
    approach as a personal mission
    mutual respect
    Leadership: SpeakUP!

Middle
    There were 60 women, 3 men. People say to me all the time "where are all
    the women?" Some had 25 years experience, some were fresh out of CU. Many
    come from these new codeschools. Women come at it often laterally, usually
    after being unemployed. Many women got CS degreees in the 80's, and are
    now back after raising their kids.

    They are educated, diligent, and hungry for work, but don't look like the
    average dev, and are denied access.

    Partly the "plug and play" mentality. They want talent to come in, and
    make it happen. They want the talent to be plugged in, and not do anything
    else. They just keep poaching one-another over time.

    The nubmer of plug-and-play hackers, they are finite. Everyone else is
    coming from scodeschool, or univserity, and you are not seeing them.
    Poeple that are comign from those places, have a huge gap in knowledge.
    The women that comes back into the workforce, she knows programs that are
    "old." 

    There is a catch 22. #1 reason for not filling position, lack of
    experience. You can't get hired without experience, you can get experience
    without being hired.


What is in that gap?
    We don't totally know, coming from this side.
    I had 4 hours of JS training. I dind't know how to do front-end
    validations, and I dind't know that companies needed me to konw that. I
    don't know what I don't know. There needs to be industry standards, or
    "you need thse 5 things" before you walk in the door.

    Imposter Syndrome
        I have a deep seeded fear, that I don't belong here.
    Stereotype Threat
        Anxiety/concern that a person will confirm a negative stereotype.
        "women are beginners and don't know what they are doing"
    Classism
        Enormous problem with learning to code. Unemployed, scrimping by, and
        just trying to figure out how to make the leap to the other side. I
        had heard devs on the company say "How can you not afford $30K ed to
        get the $70K job right after." I know women who are racking up debt
        and depending on others to learn the things they need to do, and
        meanwhile, they don't know what htey need to learn.

        I would like to ask companies to meet halfway. You have people who are
        willing to start at the bottom. It isn't just about settin ego aside.
        There is a gap in knowledge, but a lot of comapneies say traiing is
        expensive.

        We are dedicated to learning, and you give a kick-in-the-pants.

    My Recommendation
        two mentors, male/female
        assigned bugs/projects/realwork
        review assignemnts for 10 minutes at beginning of each day
        get 15 mins in the middle of day to ask questions
        15 minutes end of day to ask questions end of day
        required learning outside of office
            list of learning and timeline set up by mentors
            must work on open source
        have progress check-ins every two weeks (agile!)

    If companies did this, we'd grow exponentially.

Vague/confusing job reqs
    Standards for job descirptions need help
    Senior description sounds more junior, junior sounds more senior, both are
    vague

    HR is writing job descriptions, not engineers.

    Impostor syndrome will cause them to specifically know the particular
    things if you clearly define what you are lookign for (i.e. specific API's
    libraries)

I want to hire you
    versus
I need to find out if you're good enough

Try to include a woman in your interviews, and your evaluations. It is
difficult to sit and be interrogated by 6 male engineers. Looking for waht is
wrong with my code, rather than wha tis right.

middel recap

Bottom-up
    We have enormous drop-off in STEM after Puberty. Prior they are just as
    interested. If we want more devs, we gotta get to them when they're young

    Inspire youth!
    Get on the board of orgs like girls who code, code.org, blackgirlscode,
    codenow, etc...

    Help the poorest performing schools in your area

    What I know for sure:
        She (Oprah) is a billionaire
        We gotta stop poaching, stop looking for same critera, talented peopel
        are sitting ont he sidelines. Mothers, men over 50, autistic,
        unemployed, all hungry, diligent, smart. They may be scared cause they
        only know cobol.

Guiliani
    90-99
    homicide dropped 73
    burlglary 66
    aassut 40
    robbery 67
    autotheft 73

    Did it incrementally
        more garbage pickup
        higher petty crime penalties


There is no silver bullet for diversity problem, it will be many small
changes, from top/middle/bottom, and will require changes on everyon'e part.

Diversity is important and profitable.
Ther eis a major lack in SD
there is a need for talent.
The calvary is not coming unless imimgration laws change. 
peple of all classes/races/genders/ are hungry



Q: Specifically, within FOSS community, our problem is actually more
pernicious. Though you see sexism, it isn't as overt. With the exception of
some communities like the one at RIT, you can't go and learn about FOSS.

A: It has to come from senior leadership. The leaders at the highest levels
need to get in there and say cut it out. Make it a policy. and as far as Open
Source, women need to get better, and keep doing what they are doing. An
increase in women using it, and leadership saying somehting about it, will
help it dissipate.


Q: I've seen this plug-and-play mentality, and where I work there is a huge
contractor to full-time ratio. If you don't, if you are not one of those
plugandplay people, they'll just outsource you.

A: Start small. 2 interns! DOn't be afraid to try. There is an enormous
problem getting trained.

Q: We've had success hiring interns, and we'd like to move forward with a
mentor relationships.

A: Women don't, in general, aren't spending nights/weekends coding as much. I
don't think that it isn't about not showing diligence by not coding all
weekend long. I would say, in looking for good mentors, peopel who like
teaching, and talking about how they solved their problems, those are the
peple you want. You want to find mentors with time also, and giv ethem
time/space in order to teach, not just deal with clients. As far as good
students, anyone that is a go-getter, shows up on time, willing ot put in the
extra work, and really try, as opposed to "just winging it."

Q: We've found that having a diversity mandate is different han being
successful at finding candidates.
A: Be persistant. Sponsor women's orgs' meetups.
